good evening and welcome to sixteen by
nine Allen Stanford was among the
wealthiest men in the u.s. he bought the
lavish lifestyle from banking and
smooth-talked but his slick sales pitch
turned out to be a lie
Stanford ran one of the biggest Ponzi
schemes in American history that is
until his house of cards collapsed
costing investors billions tonight Sean
O'Shea has the story of a fraudulent
empire built with the help of one of
Canada's biggest banks the spill was
awesome
you know it was like books of fancy
pictures and data and nice office with
pictures of children on the walls it was
very very very believable and apparently
after the fact lots of people believe
here the possibilities are endless
because potential has no boundaries
he built a marketing machine and a
banking empire that spanned the globe
the Stanford organization today
maintains in excess of ten billion
dollars in deposits assets under
management our advisement that banking
Empire allowed Allen Stanford to become
one of the richest men in the world even
appeared on TV playing that role is it
fun being a billionaire well yes yes yes
I have to say this fun being a
billionaire hard when there's hard work
but as they say behind every great
fortune is a great crime I was at night
when he came on the
newse Lewis had already gone to bed and
it said the SEC has shut the Stanford
entity whatever down today in the
Southern District of Texas an indictment
charging are allen Stanford chairman of
the Houston based Stanford Financial
Group and I went and woke loose up and I
said baby we may have lost our money
with Stanford that news meant that much
of Kathleen and her husband Lewis's
retirement savings two hundred forty
thousand dollars were gone overnight
money that was handed to this man the
moral to this story is if you're full of
BS it'll get you to the top but I never
never never keep you there thank you
very much something none of the
Worcester not a was true his was a
classic Ponzi scheme yeah hard earned
money went down the drain because of him
southern Louisiana is a place where
poverty had for generations being a way
of life it was very hard my mom and dad
were sharecroppers outside Baton Rouge
here near the Mississippi people like
Kathleen Muir grew up tough it was a
struggle absolutely came home from
school put the work clothes on went to
the fields picked up a boiled potato
boiled a whatever was mama had up for us
and she would work in the fields
Kathleen went to college and became a
math teacher but after 28 years of work
she started to think about retiring we
didn't have real high expectations about
when we retire we're gonna do this we're
gonna do that we just wanted to retire
comfortably and not rely on the
government or our children Kathleen and
her husband didn't know much about
investing so she went with an investment
advisor from their local bank we did our
jobs and we we were gonna find somebody
who can help us
that's what a financial advisor does
that financial advisor suggested they
put their money with Allen Stanford and
Stanford investments for the past few
years the bank has enjoyed continued
growth in all we trusted him so much
that we thought that was the best place
to put it you know why not why why not I
I don't think there's any question but
that there will be some criminal charges
brought why not became obvious in 2009
when the Stanford bank collapsed
Kathleen and thousands of others lost
their money and a US judge called Allen
Stanford's operation one of the most
egregious criminal fraud ever presented
to a trial jury in federal court his
arrest met the end of almost two decades
of illegal financial activity but to
understand how Stanford got so big you
need to look here in Miami more than a
decade earlier
Miami was his perfect playground and it
soon became the Beatty heart of his
empire drug money built the Miami of the
1980s remember the movie Scarface
remember them the pop culture of what
Miami represented with Miami Vice the TV
show
Michael salla is an investigative
reporter at the Miami Herald you have
the drug business in the drug trade that
blew up here in the 1980s at the time it
made big headlines part of more than 22
million dollars seized by US customs
agents right here in Miami the biggest
single cash seizure in u.s. customs
history all the cocaine coming into the
country the 75% was coming through South
Florida in Miami today two detectives
were arrested on charges of shooting at
the home of a drug dealer cooperating
with federal authorities so Miami became
the epicenter not only of
train but where the drunk money was
coming in to Miami's cocaine cowboy era
had ended by the 1990s that city still
have lacks rules and was an easy place
for Allen Stanford to do business going
into the 90s allen Stanford emerges
Stanford didn't like the American
regulatory system he didn't like
regulators he didn't want regulation he
fought it his entire banking career
awash in money with very loose banking
rules corporations were flocking to the
city and they were cashing in Miami was
the perfect place where shady bankers
could do business what he wants to do
was start selling certificates of
deposit he wants to start making
investments and growing
certificates of deposit were Stanford's
bread and butter they were like buying a
savings bond and customers thought they
were insured Stanford became a
catchphrase for safe absolutely
absolutely wanting something safe never
dreamed never ever dreamed that this was
not a safe investment because um we had
a good rapport with our broker Stanford
promised approximately 3% higher returns
than similar investments sold by other
banks a profit that made allen Stanford
certificates of deposit attractive to
investors Stanford said he could promise
those higher returns because his bank
was run smarter and more efficiently
than other banks the Eagle proud symbol
of Stanford Financial Group Stanford
spread the message had made slick
corporate videos and to bring that
message to investors Stanford used
brokers our employees are the brightest
and the most highly trained
professionals in the financial services
industry they really negotiated harder
really wanted me Charles Haslett was one
of the brokers who sold investments for
Stanford here in Miami he tells us how
Stanford recruited him to work for the
company what do you remember about that
phone call with him big Texas drawl very
friendly
said kind of things I wanted to hear
that they were looking to recruit you
know some outstanding brokers use a lot
of buzzwords it's bigger than life he
would say things like we want to hire
someone that's as big as Texas they can
do all you can produce like the size of
Texas
the main reason Stanford can soar so
high is our talented staff of which I am
very proud allen Stanford paid his
brokers some of the best salaries in the
city and they're offering a good salary
salary plus a an incentive enough from
bonus to move over so how much was how
much we talking about I was in the
hundreds of thousands so this was good
this was good money yes it was but with
the fat paycheck also came pressure one
of hazlit's clients wanted more
information about those super-safe
certificates of deposit Haslett says he
confronted his bosses and asked where
the money was going and they refused all
he's all I told it was something like
this 20% stocks 50% bonds 10% really
over they didn't give me enough my
client wanted more information my client
wanted to see the portfolio basically
and they claimed it was proprietary
whose proprietary that this was some
kind of secret sauce mix write something
which banks here don't aren't allowed to
do that banks show their balance sheet
hazlit kept asking questions as what
says that in the world of Alan Stanford
that made him a problem
I was roughing too many feathers I
wasn't a team player I wasn't I wasn't a
family as long as like mafia I wasn't
like a family member I wasn't it was
questioning the questioning the The
Godfather of you if you will in that
regime people didn't ask questions
nobody asked questions it got so bad
that hazlit eventually quit in the next
few minutes I'm going to tell you about
the products the services and the
personal philosophy that makes us unique
in the financial services industry
Stanford ended up coming after him for
the bonus money he got when he joined
and hazlit says he ended up losing
hundreds of thousands of dollars in fees
and legal costs in her small town
Kathleen was also feeling the pain
caused by Stanford hey Joel here did
y'all hear what happened to the Stanford
stuff did y'all hear and I didn't want
to say word you know I was so
embarrassed I could have if I could have
gone under the table I would have next
building a case against the billionaire
allen Stanford was one of the top two or
three money laundering targets of the
FBI and other law enforcement agencies
in the Caribbean
alright ready hello everyone the first
half of 2009 like that with charm
charisma and a silver tongue hello
everyone the first half robert allen
Stanford built a massive spanking Empire
it made him a billionaire and he treated
his employees like family I want all of
you to enjoy yourself to the fullest
this weekend we have spared no expense
as you can see the rules of the family
were strict and according to hazlit
employees were not supposed to ask too
many questions about where the money was
invested people say how in the world has
this business of yours grown Alan I say
well simply because we do things
differently many times we do them the
way they used to do them 20 years ago
but at least one employee Charles
Haslett did start asking questions fact
every time I brought up anything of
meetings everybody was looking at looked
at me very shot but do you think people
didn't ask questions because the money
kept flowing sure a blind ignorance
right I think they just did they they
didn't want to didn't want to you know
they didn't want to turn the rock over
to try and get hassled on board
Stanford offered to send him to the
banks Caribbean headquarters in Antigua
I went to Antigua because Lester
Stanford kept saying you know I want you
to be able to check out our location
there you'll feel better about selling
the CDs and when I went there that's
really what I got nervous his trip to
Antigua did not put hazlit's concerns to
rest in fact it was quite the opposite
it was all very gaudy very very fancy I
didn't see any substance I entered I
talked to the bread to the manager of
the bank he didn't seem to know a lot
about banking in general Antigua is home
to Stanford international bank in the
early 1990s years before he set up at
Miami Antigua welcomed allen Stanford
and his money with open arms he moved
there and soon he and his businesses
would dominate the island
in the early 1990s Antigua had very
lacks if not non-existent money
laundering rules so you could operate in
that venue without fear of being
prosecuted locally Charles has Luke was
not the first person to start asking
hard questions about Alan stanford years
earlier this man was doing his own
investigating he suspected Stanford was
a major money launderer his name is Ross
Gaffney and he ran the white-collar
crime squad in the Miami FBI I would say
that at the time
Allen Stanford was one of the top two or
three money laundering targets of the
FBI and other law enforcement agencies
in the Caribbean we set up a sting
operation based on actionable
intelligence recorded conversations with
Stanford in which he very candidly laid
out what he charged to launder money who
he paid off he was very boastful of you
know that he was a major
money-laundering bank Ross says that
drug kingpins were good at hiding their
tracks also the Miami FBI couldn't
conduct extensive and long-term covert
ops in Antigua tough US rules prevented
them from doing so
so despite some undercover work the FBI
could not make the case against Stanford
stick mr. prime minister
members of government as Stanford's
influence on the island grew rumors of
money laundering would persist for years
he paid over $200,000 to the lead top
regulator in Antigua to look the other
way and allow him to essentially keep
his operation flourishing keep it from
being disclosed in 1999 the US
government was so fed up with Antigua
and Stanford's relationship the US
Department of the Treasury issued a rare
warning only the second of its kind in
history the American government said
that Antigua's ante money laundering
laws were weakened because the regulator
there includes representatives of the
very institutions the authority is
supposed to regulate what happened was
he basically took over the regulation of
his own bank in Antigua he was able to
put himself on the board of the
regulator's that oversaw his Bank
Antigua had become a major
money-laundering nation at Stanford who
was now the most powerful man on the
island had become a problem and our US
government reacted by issuing the
extraordinary warning and in spelling it
out that and they didn't mention them by
name one state Department wire obtained
by sixteen by nine said that the
Antiguan government has effectively
ceded oversight of its offshore sector
to an offshore banker and his minions
none of this stopped Stanford or even
slowed him down
Stanford Group company brokerage firm
with branch offices in Miami Denver
Baton Rouge
Dallas Fort Worth and Bonita Springs
staying one step ahead of the law
Allen Stanford just kept growing his
business expanding in the US and
elsewhere as you have seen the Stanford
Financial Group offers a full array of
financial services in many markets
throughout the globe Allen Stanford's
big focus in the US became those
certificates of deposit CDs he just
looted the banks Lincoln Kaler is a
Toronto lawyer who's looked into
Stanford's operation he says many of
those Stanford certificates of deposit
were worthless to many people so what he
did was he went out and sold
certificates of deposit to investors
they bought them he would pay them
interest and he paid the interest from
the new investors banks are supposed to
take certificate of deposit money and
put it in safe investments getting a
small return which they then used to pay
their investors providing investors with
a solid return on their investment
Stanford didn't do that he used new
investors money to pay the interest to
the old investors in other words a
classic Ponzi scheme so a classic no
real underlying investment that's making
money and what he did in the mean time
was take money out of the bank and spend
it on his lifestyle I just knew
something wasn't right
they couldn't generate a return of
portfolio to pay those kind of seedy
rates without something being wrong yeah
something was wrong and the fraud was
much bigger than he ever realized
the Stanford International Bank Ponzi
schemes the second biggest in the world
ever the core capital loss to the
investors is five point five billion
dollars to keep the scheme alive those
billions needed to move from Stanford's
clients in the US and South America to
accounts controlled by Allen Stanford to
do that he needed a big bank one that
would give his operation credibility for
that Stanford used the same Bank 12
million customers across Canada use but
in terms of scope the TDC visits by far
the biggest right the majority of the
money went through TD next how a
Canadian bank back to billionaire
fraudster the very fact that they are
taking him on as a correspondent bank
they're vouching for his legitimacy
so around 1990 he opened a correspondent
banking relationship of Toronto Dominion
Bank here in Toronto allen Stanford
started his 18-year relationship with
the toronto-dominion bank while he was a
small banker in Antigua ronbo beginnings
we have created a world-class financial
services organization with global reach
that relationship continued as
Stanford's business exploded
Lincoln Kaler is a Canadian lawyer his
firm is suing TD for facilitating
Stanford's Ponzi scheme without external
banks that have access to the US market
the US financial system he couldn't have
done what he did
Stanford needed to hook up with a bank
so he could easily transfer his billions
to accounts he controlled what he really
wanted according to link Caylor was a
North American bank so he could do
business in US dollars so Stanford
needed banks that would play ball based
on our investigation a number of US
banks either refused to Bank on Stanford
or quickly stopped banking him but TD
said yes to Ellen Stanford and banked
him for nearly two decades
and according to Ross Gaffney for
Stanford having that correspondent
banking relationship with TD was a big
advantage a very fact that they are
taking him on as a correspondent bank
they're vouching for his legitimacy with
other financial institutions Gaffney
says that legitimacy that TD provided
Stanford was important
a Stanford grew his business he could go
back and say to the people in the
Caribbean or to people in South America
my relationship was with you know one of
the top five banks in Canada Canada was
also known internationally as a safe
harbor a place where banking was more
conservative and less risky for GD being
a Canadian correspondent bank at moving
money for another bank also came with
responsibilities TD officials were
required to do their homework TD bankers
took due diligence trips and met with
Stanford's people their job was to make
sure his operation was aboveboard while
Stanford was looting his own bank Caylor
says TD was doing next to nothing based
on what we found out so far the content
of the presentations that we found given
to the TD bankers we're very superficial
we know other bankers who asked the
tough questions didn't get the answers
and stopped banking them according to
internal documents obtained by sixteen
by nine
there was also socializing done between
TD and Stanford officials 1td official
participated in PGA golf Pro Am
tournaments sponsored by Stanford and
Stanford staff and TD bankers ate at a
fancy restaurant together
according to link Kaler while TD had
relationships with hundreds of banks
including some of the biggest in the US
and worldwide amazingly Stanford
overtook all of them becoming TV's
biggest correspondent banking customer
the correspondent banking relationship
as we understand from our investigation
became their biggest correspondent
banking relationship which seems odd
given that it's a relatively small bank
in Antigua when I was talking about a
little bit of money here how much money
was flowing through TD Bank and Stanford
in the last year in the approximate last
12 months almost three billion dollars
went through the correspondent account
three billion dollars through TD Bank
correct in one year correct
and Kaler says all that Stanford money
going through toronto-dominion bank met
more corporate banking revenues for TD
according to TDS annual reports those
revenues increased by 71 million dollars
from 2005 to 2007 a 22 percent increase
in revenue the Kahler says was due in
part to an increase in correspondent
banking with Stanford for Stanford all
that cash coming in via the
toronto-dominion bank meant he could
have a very big lifestyle according to
Kaler he's the biggest guy he's got the
at least for private jets that he used
to fly all around the world at least two
huge yachts
he's got homes all over the world and
he's taking extravagant holidays
he's got the helicopter that says
Stanford on it so I yeah he's living
large he's the king of the hill for that
king of the hill reputation was
everything a reputation that he
carefully managed as the fraud grew
bigger we need many more investors with
this type of long-term commitment
willing to work in having a government
many times just as important
more willing to work with the investment
Stanford was the legitimate banker he
also played the role of great
philanthropist Stanford companies and
people around the world support more
than a hundred nonprofit organizations
and patron of sport one of the
monumental undertakings in the history
of world cricket the Stanford twenty20
tournament but in 2009 the game was up
for Robert Allen Stanford and his arrest
made headlines he is being charged by
the Securities and Exchange Commission
with committing fraud United States
federal officials moved in and shut down
his offices in February of that year the
securities and exchange condition
alleged is running a fraud scheme they
also seized his passport Allen Stanford
was charged with 14 counts at the time
he denied those allegations to an ABC
News reporter I will die no the hell
it's a Ponzi scheme it's no conscious
scheme the other allegation is that you
were involved with the Mexican drug
cartel helpful if you say it to my face
again I will punch you in the mouth
you're gonna punch me you know if I hit
you the mouth but I'm just saying that
is absolutely absolutely ludicrous thing
to say despite denials in 2012
Allen Stanford would be convicted on 13
of 14 counts which included fraud and
obstruction of a Securities and Exchange
Commission investigation a conviction
that led to an astonishing 110 year
sentence in the US Federal Penitentiary
the appeals court would later say that
Stanford sat atop a massive Ponzi scheme
and that by 2008 Stanford built
approximately 1 million dollars per day
from investors to finance his personal
endeavors I'm proud of everything I've
done I've never involved myself and
anything
illegal or unethical we wanted to know
why for almost two decades the
toronto-dominion bank did business with
Alan Stanford
one of the biggest fraudsters in North
American history
we asked Edie for an on-camera interview
and they told us it is TV policy to not
comment on matters before the courts in
the past TD said they had no knowledge
of Stanford's fraudulent or illegal
activities and they were neither
reckless or willfully blind at
Stanford's correspondent bankers as for
Alan Stanford he wrote to us saying
without exception everyone in the media
has lied to him and swallowed hook line
and sinker the government propaganda
with rumors of money laundering red
flags about Antigua the payment of
bribes and persistent questions about
Stanford's credibility Caylor says TD
should have been a lot more careful
there's a level of due diligence they're
supposed to go keep doing over the time
of the relationship and it's our clients
position that they fell below that
standard when they dealt with on
Stanford in his bank Kathleen Muir has
moved on from losing so much of a
retirement she's still angry at Alan
Stanford and his lies shame on you
that's what I tell him
shame on you poor people you know who
trusted Oh shame shame shame for the
lives you've ruined
you